Purpose of this is to make notes so I don't forget what I need to remember to do for the next time feel free to add.

04/06/25
Had a look at Stockfish code and safe to say quite a lot to do. As part of the bitboard function we have to create:

(1) FEN (Forsyth-Edwards notation) parser to represent any position. Conveniently, on stockfish GitHub there's a file called benchmark.cpp which we can use to test our engine to make sure it is working as expected with expected mating nets and things like that all covered.

(2) Read these parsers in and generate the 12 bitboards store them inside a struct which I have defined int he header file.

(3) This is the way stockfish does it and we should probably do the same. On startup it generates every single pieces attack table we will probably do the same which will be hard but not too bad.

Steps:

Starting Position ----->  Helper functions -----> Main function with struct generation -----> FEN parser  ***** First Major Goal *****

----->  On startup generate attack tables

05/06/25

This is going to be a a lot harder than I thought it would be. Need to create a Cmake file which tells the compiler what files I want it to compile and link unsure on how to actually go about doing this but I will hopefully get round to doing this tomorrow.

23/06/25

Have not updated this in quite a while and need to look back over past work. Fixed the cmake problem. Installed it an added it to path, installed the cmake extension on vscode. The Microsoft video on it is quite helpful and is the only reason it works. Created a CmakeLists.txt file and added my executables to it and created a presets.json file. Seems to be working fine now all I need to do is to click the side panel mess about with the builds and .exe files and tell it execute all done in the bottom left hand bar.

Look back over past work and ill update this when I get a chance.

Today spent around an hour and half watching chess programming's videos. Off to a great start following him simple easy understand pretty much everything. Needed some inspiration or a good start. 

Helper print functions, macros e.g set get and pop bits were all built and tested. An Enum for square pieces was also created and this helps a lot I can see the early forms of abstraction happening.

Tomorrows tasks are to find a way through some more research of how to transport a fen string into the bitboard and start generating the bitboards and storing it in a struct. Shouldn't be overly complicated.

24/06/25

Updated the structs and enums in bitboard.cpp the challenge now is to parse the fen string into struct defined within the uci function and pass that onto bitboard to the turn into a real position representation. Using this like switch and case statements which is like the jump tables used in assembly. used enums to parse the square index int array in the fen struct and that is the found dation. still haven't given the castling stuff much thought or how to dela with fen + pgn but that's laters problem lets get the square index and the code reading nicely.


25/06/25

Started parsing the fen string works as intended for the first segment. Only works for the first part of the board postiton of the fen string but the other parts do not work as of yet. I think tomorrow I will just need to go through it tidy it up and add some comment sot make it more readeable good documentation then move ont to fully initialising fen_rep after that I should be done. Well after that I will have to deal with edge cases with the fne plus the PGN but well see what happens. For now this is the plan:

Clean Up ----> Fully initialise ----> PGN implementation  -----> Edge Cases in PGN  ----> Bitboard Build


01/07/25

Made a lot of changes since the last update. almost finished parsing the fen string up completely. Need to build a move parser then the whole thing is complete first major milestone. Run some perft testing and after it has passed all of that make the code clean. clean up multiple declarations package everything up and make the whole initialisation process as simple as calling one function. After that I will move over used functions into a utils file and call that to make it ultra clean. Only then after everything is modular commented and up to standard I will move onto bitboard file. All in all by the end of this week I think everything should be done for both the files.

fen ----> bitboards -----> attack tables ----> move gen -----> evaluate ------> search -------> output

all in all I think a simple working prototype should be nearing completion by the end of this month.

02/07/25

Very excited. Refactor seemed to have worked with minimal problems. Had a problem with vector size being too large this was due to me not including curly braces in the else clause so code kept accessing garbage values. Cpp not including an IndexError has to be one of the biggest draw backs of using this language but I am getting use to it. Plan is to keep pushing on clean up code run some tests on it if all goes well we will tackle the bitboard init stuff. But a milestone today fen string is parsed and is currently accurately representing board state. 

Move onto bitboards should take a couple of days. Maybe I will refactor my macros into solid inline functions but we will see how it goes.

08/07/25

I was working for the last few days so couldn't find as much time to work on this as I wanted to. Despite that, the bitboard works fine parsing fen strings without moves perfectly. That is stage 2 finished very happy. Next steps are to build various attack tables. After that creating a move gen function. This will have to deal with all the nuances of chess promotions, enpassant, checkmates and should be the biggest file yet of the project. Before I even attempt to write this I will need to sit down and make a real plan of how I want the control flow to work in this program. What I want each function to be responsible for and what is the final output of the file. Maybe I'm assigning this function too many priorities with dealing with game state as well but well see how far I can get in this and what my plans are. Next steps are to sit down and plan the coding part is easy once you have the theory down.

11/07/25

Generated all the attack tables for leaper pieces. It was a lot easier than I expected just shifting bits around checking for wrap arounds. One thing I will have to implement is pawn pushes. Knights and kings is just a simple bitwise instruction to check for white piece occupancy and that yields the real attacks. Found this GitHub online that gives me the rook and bishop magics for now I will just have to do their masks and go from there.

Its the next morning. Finished implementing the king attack tables. Generated rook and bishop masks excluding board edges. I am starting to understand how magic bitboards work but not fully this is the first step. The next step is to generate the rays considering blockers and multiply that by a magic number. I will probably use pre calculated magics save me a lot of time and effort and I doubt I will be able to make massive gains in performance by finding the maximum possible number of constructive collisions. 














